fix: updates RFC 0012 reflecting the current state of the audit scanner. (#29)
kubewarden/rfc: rfc/0012-policy-report.md

| :----------- | :---------------------------------------- |
| Feature Name | Policy Report format audit checks         |
| Start Date   | 08/05/2022                                |

> | Update Date  | 03/06/2023                                |

Reviewer: 2024?

Author: Fixed

also be used to record audit results from other kind of tools (like Kubernetes
security scanning tools as Falco or Kubebench).

Kubewarden tailors its audit reports to the scope of the resources it
evaluates. Depending on the resource's scope, it generates two types of
reports: `PolicyReport` or  `ClusterPolicyReport`.

> Both the `ClusterPolicyReport` and `PolicyReport` serve a similar purpose and
> are structurally comparable. The primary distinction between them lies in their
> applicability: one is suited for namespaced resources, while the other is
> appropriate for cluster-wide resources. Despite this difference, the
> fundamental aspects and the details they convey remain consistent across both
> report types. Hence, the following descriptions and interpretations applicable
> to the `PolicyReport` are equally relevant for the `ClusterPolicyReport`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both the `ClusterPolicyReport` and `PolicyReport` serve similar purposes and
are similar in structure. The primary distinction between them lies in their
applicability: one is suited for namespaced resources, the other
for cluster-wide resources. Despite this difference, the
fundamental aspects and the details they convey remain consistent across both
report types. So, the following descriptions and interpretations for
the `PolicyReport` are equally applicable to the `ClusterPolicyReport`.
```

## Report

When auditing a resource, certain Kubewarden policies may be relevant to the
events occurring within it. Additionally, the same Kubernetes resource might
undergo evaluation by multiple policies, resulting in several policy
evaluations being conducted

The `PolicyReport` provides these information:

- The number of policy evaluations conducted during the audit run.
- The count of policy evaluations resulting in resource acceptance, rejection,
  or failure due to errors. Policy failures occur when errors arise during
  evaluation, such as runtime panics.
- Comprehensive details regarding all evaluations performed, including the
  policy utilized, the evaluated resource, the final outcome (acceptance,
  rejection, or failure), and any accompanying messages returned by the policy.

The `PolicyReport` is kept updated during the lifetime of the audited resource,
meaning:

- New Policies might become "interested" about the resource. New evaluations
  results will be added to the `PolicyReport`
- Existing Kubernetes objects and policies can change over time: some
  evaluations could change their outcome (pass -> fail and vice versa). The
  evaluation results must reflect that

> - Policies might be deleted/might be no longer "interested" in the resource:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Policies might be deleted or might be no longer "interested" in the resource:
```

>   the report must be updated to not container any reference the these policies
>   and their evaluation results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the report must be updated to not contain any reference to these policies
  and their evaluation results
```

- Kubernetes resources might be deleted: the report should be deleted together

>   with if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  with it
```

**Note:** `PolicyReport` resources contain security/compliance information. Regular
users of the cluster should only have READ access to them. They should not be
able to create, delete or change their contents. This can be done with Kubernetes

> RBAC rules.

Reviewer 2: I think we should point out that, due to security reasons, a cluster administrator should play safe and give no access to these reports to regular users of the cluster. If they want to relax that, the could give READ access only to the reports that are defined inside of the Namespaces that can be used by the regular users.

What I mean is: if Bob can create resources under the `foo` Namespace, then Bob might get READ access to the reports inside of the `foo` namespace.

### `PolicyReport` detailed overview

> For each Namespace, Kubewarden will find all the policies that are interested
> about actions happening inside of it. This is going to be a mix of
> some `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` policies and all the `AdmissionPolicy` policies
> that are defined inside of the Namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each Namespace, Kubewarden will find all the policies that are interested
in actions happening in it. This is going to be a mix of
some `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` policies and all the `AdmissionPolicy` policies
that are defined in the Namespace.
```

Next, this list of policies is going to be filtered: only policies interested
in `CREATE` events are going to be considered.
The audit report is not going to simulate `DELETE` and `UPDATE` events.

For each relevant policy, Kubewarden will find all the Kubernetes resources that

> are 1) defined inside of the Namespace and 2) are relevant to the policy. Kubewarden

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are 1) defined in the Namespace and 2) are relevant to the policy. Kubewarden
```

will then simulate the `CREATE` event of this resource and keep track of the policy
evaluation result.

> All the results are going to be collected into the `PolicyReport` object
> defined inside of the Namespace. There's going to be only one `PolicyReport`
> per audited resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the results are going to be collected into the `PolicyReport` object
defined in the Namespace. There's going to be only one `PolicyReport`
per audited resource.
```

The `PolicyReport` resource has the following fields:

- `apiVersion` and `kind`: these are defined by the CRDs

> - `metadata`: this is the usual `meta/v1.ObjectMeta` resource. In the

Reviewer 3: we added an OwnerReference in the metadata pointing to the resource to allow the report to be garbage collected when the resource is deleted

>   in use includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in use include:
```

    - `name`: set with the audited resource UID.
    - `ownerReference`: owner reference object pointing to the audited
      resource. Hence, when the resource is deleted the Kubernetes garbage
      collector will also remove the report.
- `scope`: this is a `core/v1.ObjectReference` resource. We will use that to
  reference the audited resource that has been analyzed
- `scopeSelector`: we will not use that, because we are using the `scope` field
- `summary`: this is an object defined by a CRD `PolicyReportSummary`. It's made

>   of the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from the following fields:
```

  - `error`: count of policies that could not be evaluated.
    The policies could not be evaluated because of errors
    (for example: a runtime panic of a broken policy)
  - `skip`: count of policies that were not selected for evaluation.
    We will allow some policies to be excluded from the background checks, more
    on that later.
- `results` this probably the most important field. It's a list of `PolicyReportResult`
  objects

The structure of the `PolicyReportResult` is flexible. This is how we are going
to use its fields:

- `source`: identifier for the policy engine that manages this report. We will
  set that to be `kubewarden`
- `policy`: this is the name of the policy that evaluated the resource. This
  could be both a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or a `AdmissionPolicy`.
  Because of that we cannot use the name of the policy, there could be clashes
  between cluster and namespaced policy names. We will instead use the following

>   convention to build the contents of this field: `<[cap|ap]>-<policy name>`.

Reviewer 3: in the new implementation we use the policy unique name instead (e.g. clusterwide-policyname or namespaced-default-policy)

>   For example, a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` named `provileged-containers` will

Reviewer 3: typo privileged-containers

  properties:
    policy-resource-version: "2725"
    policy-uid: e57022c3-146f-4470-991f-cc0287a29eab
    validating: "true"
  resourceSelector: {}
  result: pass
  scored: true
  severity: low
  source: kubewarden
  timestamp:
    nanos: 0
    seconds: 1709753640
- category: PSP
  policy: namespaced-default-allow-privilege-escalation-psp
  properties:
    mutating: "true"
    policy-resource-version: "1723"
    policy-uid: 9e3efc5c-e02f-4694-90c7-8157903ec0bc
  resourceSelector: {}
  result: pass
  scored: true
  severity: medium
  source: kubewarden
  timestamp:
    nanos: 0
    seconds: 1709753640
scope:
  apiVersion: v1
  kind: Pod
  name: nginx-privileged
  namespace: default
  resourceVersion: "1128"
  uid: feaad3c9-8534-496b-a04b-0707f6876133
summary:
  error: 0
  fail: 1
  pass: 2
  skip: 0
  warn: 0
```

## Changes to `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` and `AdmissionPolicy`

We will extend the `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` and `AdmissionPolicy` resources to have
a new optional field called `background`.
This field is going to hold a boolean value, which is going to be set to be `true` by default.

Policies that have `background` set to false will be ignored during the background

> scans. Hence they will never show inside of the reports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scans. Hence they will never show in the reports.
```

# Drawbacks

The proposed solution will generate many reports. Which means that it can be
difficult to visualize all the reports together.

# Unresolved questions

How to keep the `PolicyReport`s and `ClusterPolicyReport` up to date. This is
going to be covered by another RFC.

# Alternatives

Instead of using the `PolicyReport` CRDs, we could adopt the same approach used
by Gatekeeper [audit feature](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/audit/#constraint-status).

> Gatekeeper stores the report results inside of our equivalent of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatekeeper stores the report results in our equivalent of
```

`AdmissionPolicy` and `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` objects.

> We could store the violation details inside of the `status` field of each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could store the violation details in the `status` field of each
```

Policies that have `background` set to false will be ignored during the background
scans. Hence they will never show inside of the reports.

## Drawbacks

> We will have just one `PolicyReport` per Namespace. Depending on the number of

Reviewer 3: this is outdated
